## Acknowledgments

In the spring of 2023, when I told my dad how cool Azure OpenAI was becoming, his reply was kind of a shock: “Why don’t you write a book about it?” He said it so naturally that it hit me as if he really thought I could do it. In fact, he added, “Are you up for it?” Then there was no need to say more. Loretta Yates at Microsoft Press enthusiastically accepted my proposal, and the story of this book began in June 2023.

AI has been a hot topic for the better part of a decade, but the emergence of new-generation large language models (LLMs) has propelled it into the mainstream. The increasing number of people using them translates to more ideas, more opportunities, and new developments. And this makes all the difference.

Hence, the book you hold in your hands can’t be the ultimate and definitive guide to AI and LLMs because the speed at which AI and LLMs evolve is impressive and because—by design—every book is an act of approximation, a snapshot of knowledge taken at a specific moment in time. Approximation inevitably leads to some form of dissatisfaction, and dissatisfaction leads us to take on new challenges. In this regard, I wish for myself decades of dissatisfaction. And a few more years of being on the stage presenting books written for a prestigious publisher—it does wonders for my ego.

First, I feel somewhat indebted to all my first dates since May because they had to endure monologues lasting at least 30 minutes on LLMs and some weird new approach to transformers.

True thanks are a private matter, but publicly I want to thank Martina first, who cowrote the appendix with me and always knows what to say to make me better. My gratitude to her is keeping a promise she knows. Thank you, Martina, for being an extraordinary human being.

To Gianfranco, who taught me the importance of discussing and expressing, even loudly, when something doesn’t please us, and taught me to always ask, because the worst thing that can happen is hearing a no. Every time I engage in a discussion, I will think of you.

I also want to thank Matteo, Luciano, Gabriele, Filippo, Daniele, Riccardo, Marco, Jacopo, Simone, Francesco, and Alessia, who worked with me and supported me during my (hopefully not too frequent) crises. I also have warm thoughts for Alessandro, Antonino, Sara, Andrea, and Cristian who tolerated me whenever we weren’t like 25-year-old youngsters because I had to study and work on this book.

To Mom and Michela, who put up with me before the book and probably will continue after. To my grandmas. To Giorgio, Gaetano, Vito, and Roberto for helping me to grow every day. To Elio, who taught me how to dress and see myself in more colors.

As for my dad, Dino, he never stops teaching me new things—for example, how to get paid for doing things you would just love to do, like being the technical editor of this book. Thank you, both as a father and as an editor. You bring to my mind a song you well know: “Figlio, figlio, figlio.”

Beyond Loretta, if this book came to life, it was also because of the hard work of Shourav, Kate, and Dan. Thank you for your patience and for trusting me so much.

This book is my best until the next one!
