## Introduction

This is my third book on artificial intelligence (AI), and the first I wrote on my own, without the collaboration of a coauthor. The sequence in which my three books have been published reflects my own learning path, motivated by a genuine thirst to understand AI for far more than mere business considerations. The first book, published in 2020, introduced the mathematical concepts behind machine learning (ML) that make it possible to classify data and make timely predictions. The second book, which focused on the Microsoft ML.NET framework, was about concrete applications—in other words, how to make fancy algorithms work effectively on amounts of data hiding their complexity behind the charts and tables of a familiar web front end.

Then came ChatGPT.

The technology behind astonishing applications like ChatGPT is called a *large language model (LLM)*, and LLMs are the subject of this third book. LLMs add a crucial capability to AI: the ability to generate content in addition to classifying and predicting. LLMs represent a paradigm shift, raising the bar of communication between humans and computers and opening the floodgates to new applications that for decades we could only dream of.

And for decades, we did dream of these applications. Literature and movies presented various supercomputers capable of crunching any sort of data to produce human-intelligible results. An extremely popular example was HAL 9000—the computer that governed the spaceship Discovery in the movie *2001: A Space Odyssey* (1968). Another famous one was JARVIS (Just A Rather Very Intelligent System), the computer that served Tony Stark’s home assistant in *Iron Man* and other movies in the Marvel Comics universe.

Often, all that the human characters in such books and movies do is simply “load data into the machine,” whether in the form of paper documents, digital files, or media content. Next, the machine autonomously figures out the content, learns from it, and communicates back to humans using natural language. But of course, those supercomputers were conceived by authors; they were only science fiction. Today, with LLMs, it is possible to devise and build concrete applications that not only make human–computer interaction smooth and natural, but also turn the old dream of simply “loading data into the machine” into a dazzling reality.

This book shows you how to build software applications using the same type of engine that fuels ChatGPT to autonomously communicate with users and orchestrate business tasks driven by plain textual prompts. No more, no less—and as easy and striking as it sounds!

### Who should read this book

Software architects, lead developers, and individuals with a background in programming—particularly those familiar with languages like Python and possibly C# (for ASP.NET Core)—will find the content in this book accessible and valuable. In the vast realm of software professionals who might find the book useful, I’d call out those who have an interest in ML, especially in the context of LLMs. I’d also list cloud and IT professionals with an interest in using cloud services (specifically Microsoft Azure) or in sophisticated, real-world applications of human-like language in software. While this book focuses primarily on the services available on the Microsoft Azure platform, the concepts covered are easily applicable to analogous platforms. At the end of the day, using an LLM involves little more than calling a bunch of API endpoints, and, by design, APIs are completely independent of the underlying platform.

In summary, this book caters to a diverse audience, including programmers, ML enthusiasts, cloud-computing professionals, and those interested in natural language processing, with a specific emphasis on leveraging Azure services to program LLMs.

### Assumptions

To fully grasp the value of a programming book on LLMs, there are a couple of prerequisites, including proficiency in foundational programming concepts and a familiarity with ML fundamentals. Beyond these, a working knowledge of relevant programming languages and frameworks, such as Python and possibly ASP.NET Core, is helpful, as is an appreciation for the significance of classic natural language processing in the context of business domains. Overall, a blend of programming expertise, ML awareness, and linguistic understanding is recommended for a comprehensive grasp of the book’s content.

### This book might not be for you if…

This book might not be for you if you’re just seeking a reference book to find out in detail how to use a particular pattern or framework. Although the book discusses advanced aspects of popular frameworks (for example, LangChain and Semantic Kernel) and APIs (such as OpenAI and Azure OpenAI), it does not qualify as a programming reference on any of these. The focus of the book is on using LLMs to build useful applications in the business domains where LLMs really fit well.

### Organization of this book

This book explores the practical application of existing LLMs in developing versatile business domain applications. In essence, an LLM is an ML model trained on extensive text data, enabling it to comprehend and generate human-like language. To convey knowledge about these models, this book focuses on three key aspects:

- The first three chapters delve into scenarios for which an LLM is effective and introduce essential tools for crafting sophisticated solutions. These chapters provide insights into conversational programming and prompting as a new, advanced, yet structured, approach to coding.
- The next two chapters emphasize patterns, frameworks, and techniques for unlocking the potential of conversational programming. This involves using natural language in code to define workflows, with the LLM-based application orchestrating existing APIs.
- The final three chapters present concrete, end-to-end demo examples featuring Python and ASP.NET Core. These demos showcase progressively advanced interactions between logic, data, and existing business processes. In the first demo, you learn how to take text from an email and craft a fitting draft for a reply. In the second demo, you apply a retrieval augmented generation (RAG) pattern to formulate responses to questions based on document content. Finally, in the third demo, you learn how to build a hotel booking application with a chatbot that uses a conversational interface to ascertain the user’s needs (dates, room preferences, budget) and seamlessly places (or denies) reservations according to the underlying system’s state, without using fixed user interface elements or formatted data input controls.

### Downloads: notebooks and samples

Python and Polyglot notebooks containing the code featured in the initial part of the book, as well as the complete codebases for the examples tackled in the latter part of the book, can be accessed on GitHub at:

*[https://github.com/Youbiquitous/programming-llm](https://github.com/Youbiquitous/programming-llm)*

### Errata, updates, & book support

We’ve made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this book and its companion content. You can access updates to this book—in the form of a list of submitted errata and their related corrections—at:

*[MicrosoftPressStore.com/LLMAzureAI/errata](http://MicrosoftPressStore.com/LLMAzureAI/errata)*

If you discover an error that is not already listed, please submit it to us at the same page.

For additional book support and information, please visit *[MicrosoftPressStore.com/Support](http://MicrosoftPressStore.com/Support)*.

Please note that product support for Microsoft software and hardware is not offered through the previous addresses. For help with Microsoft software or hardware, go to *[http://support.microsoft.com](http://support.microsoft.com)*.

### Stay in touch

Let’s keep the conversation going! We’re on X / Twitter: *[http://twitter.com/MicrosoftPress](http://twitter.com/MicrosoftPress)*.
