# 3

# Language and the Fundamental Mechanics of Explaining

How often have you read documentation to be left uncertain if the recommendations or details you read are what you should follow? It may have contained plenty of technical details and code examples that you thought were relevant to you, but you were left unclear on which to implement and how.

These are likely relevant criticisms of any documentation. As we all know, documentation is hard. What I mean is, did you trust it? Were you confident in what it said? Did you believe what it said was as correct as possible, all caveats aside? [*Chapter 2*](B20936_02.xhtml#_idTextAnchor042) covered the different types of documentation you might need to produce. This chapter looks at ensuring that all the words you fill that documentation with are clear, confident, and trusted by the people you want to read it.

A lot of people write without confidence, especially in technical documentation. That’s OK! There are many reasons people aren’t confident when they write, and the next section looks at them in detail.

This chapter covers the following main topics:

- Common reasons for not writing confidently
- How to improve your writing
- Inclusive language

# Common reasons for not writing confidently

Some are born with a pen in their hands, their fingers on the keyboard, and words flow from their brains easily. Well, they appear to anyway. But for many of us, writing can be a slow process, and different reasons cause our writing not to be the best it could be. This section looks at some of the most common and how to improve them.

## Not a native speaker

Let’s face it. While a lot of documentation is in English, many of its readers and writers don’t have English as their native language. English is wonderfully vague and flexible, which is one reason it remains popular and successful as a global language of communication. However, it is full of strange subtleties, and while many understand it, few understand it to an advanced level. This includes many of those who have it as a native language. Many of us learn very little about its grammar and advanced usage. I had my last formal English grammar lesson when I was about 15. English has multiple *flavours*. I used the non-American spelling there on purpose as I am primarily a British and Australian English speaker, forced to use American English most of the time, weeping all the time while simultaneously realizing that few would even be speaking English if it weren’t for America… I digress. What I mean is that even within “English,” there are differences and subtleties that make no sense to its own speakers.

George Bernard Shaw once said, “*England and America are two countries separated by the* *same language.*”

It took me moving to a country that spoke a different language (Germany) to start re-analyzing and learning my language. This coincided with my use and involvement with the **Vale** language **linter** (more on that in *Chapters 6* and *9*), which meant I needed to start breaking grammatical rules down and thus understand them much more.

Anyway, this chapter intends not to be a dry grammar lesson but to teach you a handful of tips and tricks to lift your grammar use and increase confidence in your writing. However, I am still covering grammar, so while I try not to give you nightmares of school lessons, I might occasionally. It’s worth it – I promise!

## Intentionally vague

Why would you want to make writing intentionally lacking confidence, unclear, or vague? There are reasons. I won’t say “valid reasons” as I don’t think they are valid, but there you go. One is a lack of knowledge, which relates to my earlier point. Often, when people write English without understanding its best practices, they tend to stuff their writing with unnecessary words to compensate or sometimes to show off. I don’t mean this as a negative criticism. Understandably, someone would think clever words equal clever writing, but it’s not true. And remember that I said many documentation consumers aren’t reading in their native language? Well, stuffing text with unnecessary words also makes it harder for them to read and understand.

Returning to showing off, I am sorry to say, developers, but often you also tend to want to use documentation to show how clever your coding skills are. I get it! I understand! I cover how to demonstrate your programming prowess better later.

## Marketing and product reasons

This reason is possibly the hardest for writers and developers to counter. Documentation isn’t the place for marketing messaging, but often, as it’s one of the most popular destinations on a website, it’s used for that purpose. Documentation should deal with cold, hard facts. Marketing – well, let’s be honest – doesn’t always. This isn’t a book about marketing writing – quite the opposite – but try your best to keep marketing-style language out of documentation. Let the documentation and the quality of the product sell itself, not unclear writing. The same applies to product decisions. Often, a product team wants documentation to hide problems or inadequacies through intentionally vague language or offer promises that may or may not be true. Again, try your best to push back on this. Honest, believable documentation sells a product far more.

## Reducing cognitive load

Another common thread that runs through most of the advice here is about reducing the cognitive load on readers as they try to understand complex concepts. Everything you can do to reduce that is a positive. They will probably figure out what you mean by rereading and trial and error, so initially, these small issues don’t seem like such a big deal. But multiply them by all the small issues, and they add up, increasing the confusion and frustration a user experiences trying to understand your documentation.

## Inclusive language

While it doesn’t directly affect the understandability of documentation, using inclusive and accessible language broadens the potential audience and improves readability. In my opinion, non-inclusive language is a language that is the following:

- Patronizing
- Rude
- Overly negative
- Biased
- Outdated
- Unhelpful

The writing tips in the upcoming section cover improving your writing generally and for inclusivity and accessibility. There are, however, a couple of items from the list above that need more specific recommendations, and I cover those after the general tips.

# How to improve your writing

The following tips are some common steps I take to make writing more confident and easier to understand.

## Consistency

Decide on the terminology you use to describe and identify certain terms and stick to it. Figure out your documentation’s general tone of voice and stick to it. Every inconsistency you have leaves the reader wondering if you mean the same thing as you meant before. Does a distributed network consist of units, nodes, or instances? It doesn’t matter which you pick, but once you do, stick to it. Once you settle on an example use case or more, stick to them and build upon them. Are you formal or friendly in your tone? Do you use humor (if you do, be careful, but that’s another discussion)? Again, your decision isn’t important at this level of discussion. What’s important is that you stick to your decision.

Regarding terminology, technology is full of jargon and acronyms. That is, single-letter combinations of words (for example, UI, JSON, and API). Sometimes, we use them so often that I think many of us aren’t even sure what they stand for anymore. For less common acronyms, and maybe even some of those less common than you might think, it’s good practice to expand the acronym before you start using it.

Here’s an example:

“*This guide covers how to use our command-line* *interface (CLI).*”

Similarly, if your chosen terminology or acronyms aren’t standard, or you’re unsure if they are standard, it’s a good idea to start with or include a link to a terminology guide.

[*Chapter 6*](B20936_06.xhtml#_idTextAnchor105) covers style guides that take writing consistency to other levels, but initially, you can start with these basic decisions, and they help you define and create a style guide over time.

## Involving the user

OK – now comes an actual grammar lesson masquerading as a conversation about user-focused content. I must try my best, you know. Look at these two explanations of a hypothetical product.

Here’s example one:

“*A result is returned by* *the function.*”

And this is example two:

“*The function returns* *a result.*”

On the surface, they seem similar and explain the same concept, but they are different.

Example one uses what’s called the *passive voice*, and example two uses what’s called the *active voice*. You might have heard these concepts before, as they are spoken about often in some forms of writing, and much has been written and said about them. However, understanding the difference and, more importantly, what to change is sometimes complex.

It’s easier to start by explaining active voice. With an active voice, you make the actor(s) and the subject(s) clear and specific. In many cases in technical documentation, and in the preceding example, the actor is the reader, but this is not always true. The actor could also be another function, a service, a company department, and so on. The subject is typically what the reader is interested in understanding – for example, *the function* in the example – but not always. The subject could also be another function, a service, another system, and so on.

And what is passive voice? The subject is often clear in passive voice, but generally not the actor.

Typically, with technical documentation, you should use active voice as much as possible. It involves the reader, making your writing sound more confident as the interactions and actions are clear to them. Passive voice can obscure details and make it unclear what is happening with what effect. Often, rephrasing a sentence into active voice also helps you to rethink in more detail how the components of a system fit together and understand it better from a user's perspective. However, it isn’t always possible to make the actor(s) and subject(s) clear or making them clear makes a sentence more confusing. For example, in complex, distributed systems, where actors influence other actors, what happens in what order and when is unclear.

Stephen King’s wonderful book *On Writing*, which is useful for writers of all flavors, contains many juicy quotes about confident grammar, especially active versus passive voice. He has this to say on the subject:

“*Verbs come in two types, active and passive. With an active verb, the subject of the sentence is* *doing something.*

*With a passive verb, something is being done to the sentence’s subject. The subject is just letting it happen. You should avoid the* *passive tense.*”

The reasons someone uses passive voice relate much to the points discussed earlier. It’s easier to write in a passive voice for inexperienced writers. Personally, I tend to start with it in the first draft and switch to active voice in later drafts. It can be a more fluid way of writing. Marketing and product teams may push for using passive voice or at least start using it in any copy they contribute. This relates to some of my earlier points. Using passive voice can make you sound less responsible for something.

If you want a final example of why to avoid passive voice, think of a time you had to deal with some form of bureaucracy or service personnel. If you live in a non-English speaking country where passive and active language is less of an issue, this example might not fully apply, but I am sure you can at least identify with it.

How did they deal with and respond to you? It was probably in a distant and cold, non-committal way. Say, for example, you made an application request, and you received a response such as the following:

“*Approval will be notified in* *due course.*”

What does that mean? When? By whom? This is an example of “passive-aggressive” communication, a wonderful term commonly used in British English to describe a way of communicating that is intentionally unclear and aggressive without sounding like it is.

Do you want your documentation to sound like that? I thought not! Then, try and use active voice.

Another classic quote from *On Writing* that really pushes the point about confident writing is this:

“*Many writers are attracted to passive verbs. The passive voice is safe. There is no troublesome action to contend with; the subject just has to close its eyes and think of England, to paraphrase Queen Victoria. I think unsure writers also feel the passive voice somehow lends their work authority, perhaps even a quality* *of majesty.*”

King then continues criticizing instruction manuals’ writers, so stop there. Technical writing has improved its reputation in the 20+ years since he wrote the book, so forgive him for now.

## Keeping it short

It’s tempting to say “keep it simple” instead, but this is technical documentation and not always simple, and you should avoid using words such as “simple” anyway. However, just because what you are explaining is complex doesn’t mean you need to write verbose and rambling text. Writing short, concise text is much harder than writing longer text.

There is a famous and often mis-accredited (Pascal, Locke, Franklin, Thoreau, Cicero, Wilson?) quote:

“*If I Had More Time, I Would Have Written a* *Shorter Letter*”

This could be because you are an inexperienced writer, and learning the skills to explain yourself concisely takes time and experience. It could also be because you don’t understand what you’re explaining as much as you think. I have always argued that you can summarize any concept, no matter how complex, into what's called an “elevator pitch” in the business world. That is a pitch that someone could hear during an elevator ride. Probably a couple of minutes at most. I imagine many technical people are reading this and thinking, “That’s impossible. How could I possibly reduce my amazing, unique, and technically brilliant idea into a couple of minutes? I need hours!”

You don’t.

Of course, that elevator pitch misses details – a lot of details. But that’s OK. This is not something you even need to include in the documentation but is more of an exercise in getting you to think concisely. Start with what you are documenting to help people accomplish. When someone first encounters your project or product, that’s all most people want to know to begin with. Then, they make their minds up to dig further from there.

Take **Kubernetes**, for example. It’s an extremely complex and configurable tool, and if you wanted to explain everything it was possible to do with it, you would need a long amount of time. But an elevator pitch for Kubernetes could be something like the following:

“*An open source way for automating the running and management of large-scale applications to suit* *user needs.*”

Similarly, you can take that elevator pitch and expand explanations from there. Instead of starting writing from the technical nitty gritty, you start explaining from the simplest user-focused perspective.

This covers the conceptual ways to simplify and shorten your writing, but what about the technical how? Try the following tips.

## Removing unnecessary words

English is a flexible language. You could put an English sentence in a blender, and it would still make sense at the end (I am sure this is a quote from somewhere, but I can’t find the source). You can also cut many words from sentences, and they hold up just fine. Knowing which words to remove takes time and experience, but here are a few common candidates, often called “weasel words.”

### Beginning a sentence with the word “so”

It is often common in spoken language to indicate a pause or beginning of a phrase. It’s typically unnecessary when used at the beginning of a sentence or phrase in written language, especially technical writing. It is still useful and valid in other contexts.

Here are some examples:

“*So, now you have the* *package installed.*”

“*Authenticate so that you can* *issue commands.*”

The “so” in the first example is unnecessary and has no purpose. In the second example, the “so” has more purpose and is OK, used as is, but you could still probably rewrite it in a clearer way.

### Using words such as “simply,” “easily,” and “just”

Don’t tell readers that something is easy or straightforward. Let them discover it themselves. If the reader finds that something isn’t as “simple” or as “easy” as you said it was, that text makes them feel inferior or stupid, or perhaps it shows that your product or documentation doesn’t work. Removing these words also helps you address inclusive language by reducing patronizing and unhelpful aspects of language.

### Using the word “very”

Rarely needed in technical writing, “very” does nothing but accentuate something you have already said. While this can work in less formal language, narrative, or fiction writing, it isn’t needed in technical writing. It can come across as over the top, “marketing speak,” and – yes – unconfident. You don’t need to tell someone something is “very fast.” They will figure out if it is themselves, and if it turns out not “very fast,” then your writing seems disingenuous.

### Adverbs and adjectives

Most words that don’t add value to documentation are examples of “adverbs” and “adjectives.”

It’s time for a short grammar lesson:

- A *verb* is a word that describes an action, state, or something that happened. It’s often the main part of a sentence. For example, in “*The function returns value x*,” the verb is “*returns*.”
- A *noun* is a person, place, or thing. For example, “*function*” is a noun.
- An *adjective* is a word that describes a noun, for example, a “*complex function*.”
- An *adverb* is a word or phrase that modifies or adds to an adjective or verb, for example, a “*very* *complex function*.”

OK – with that summary out of the way, I can return to my main point. In technical English, you rarely need adverbs or adjectives. Generally, they only confirm something you have already said or add no value to what you need to say.

For example, does a reader need to know if a function is complex? Maybe they do, but they don’t need to know that it’s a very complex function. In those examples, “function” is a noun, “complex” is an adjective, and “very” is an adverb. The only word documentation usually needs is the noun.

I appreciate that recognizing an English sentence’s various parts takes time and experience, but tools are available to help. [*Chapter 8*](B20936_08.xhtml#_idTextAnchor145) covers some of these.

Another great quote from *On Writing*:

“*With adverbs, the writer usually tells us they aren’t expressing themselves clearly, that they are not getting the point or the* *picture across.*”

### Using shorter phrases and words

As you slowly cut “weasel” words, your text becomes shorter, but often, there are entire phrases you can replace with one word and lose maybe some nuance but little meaning. And technical writing isn’t about nuance but clear, concise language.

Classic examples are some of the following:

- “*to*” instead of “*in order to*”. Most of the time, “*to*” does the job, but sometimes “*in order to*” can show more purpose or motivation, but this isn’t often relevant with tech writing.
- “*Most*” instead of “*Almost all*.”
- “*Now*” instead of “*At the* *present time*.”
- “*Often*” instead of” In *many cases*.”
- “*Sometimes*” instead of “*In* *some cases*.”

There are many other “weasel” words (not all commonly used in technical writing anyway). Some of the the tools covered in [*Chapter 9*](B20936_09.xhtml#_idTextAnchor162) help will help you identify these words, but for more comprehensive lists, try the following links:

- [https://dianaurban.com/words-you-should-cut-from-your-writing-immediately](https://dianaurban.com/words-you-should-cut-from-your-writing-immediately)
- [https://www.brandeis.edu/writing-program/resources/faculty/handouts/four-types-unnecessary-words-phrases.html](https://www.brandeis.edu/writing-program/resources/faculty/handouts/four-types-unnecessary-words-phrases.html)
- [https://blog.wordvice.com/avoid-fillers-powerful-writing/](https://blog.wordvice.com/avoid-fillers-powerful-writing/)

## Don’t show off – let the product speak for itself

At the risk of repeating myself, many documentation readers aren’t native English speakers, so using overly complex language and phrases likely confuses them as they try to accomplish their goals. Documentation isn’t the place to show off your English skills. The same applies to native English speakers, who need to be especially careful not to overuse cultural references and colloquialisms that are not only unfamiliar to non-native speakers but are equally unfamiliar to native English speakers from other countries.

Documentation is also not the place to show off how good you think your product or programming skills are. If you need a place to do that, save it for a blog post.

From an inclusivity perspective, “showing off” can add to rude, negative, or unhelpful language. While not common, I have come across documentation that makes dismissive assumptions about the readers’ education or technical level that comes across as arrogant and thus rude.

I know I have disappointed many writers when I have chopped and changed all the wonderful prose they spent hours crafting, but again, the reader is the most important person.

## Don’t repeat yourself

There are certain things worth repeating in tech writing and certain things you don’t need to repeat.

You don’t need to repeat something you just said to make a point. Again, this comes back to confident writing. If a reader just learned that authenticating with your API is “easy,” you don’t need to tell them again.

Here’s an example (and there are a few things wrong with this example to illustrate the point):

“*Get your access key from the control panel in the top-left corner of the dashboard to authenticate with the API. Now you have your API key, you can authenticate with* *the API.*”

However, it is worth repeating yourself to summarize what the reader has learned in a section or page. As the next chapter covers, page structure also aids understanding and documentation. Readers often don’t read pages from start to finish, so regularly summarizing sections helps a reader know what they should know but might have scrolled past.

# Inclusive language: in more detail

I promised to revisit the topic of using more inclusive language that didn’t fit into some of the more general advice. The following sections cover this, but practically speaking, you can consider more inclusive writing to be generally better writing.

## Overly negative language

Unnecessary negativity is rarely found in documentation but not completely unheard of. Documentation is not the place for opinions on your product or anyone else’s. It isn’t the place to criticize certain approaches or technical decisions or give your opinions on software development or the tech industry. It’s certainly not the place to make the reader feel inferior. It’s a place to help people learn how to use something. If you have opinions to share, save them for a personal blog post, podcast, or video.

Another less obvious use of negative language to avoid is when describing what the reader can and can’t do with what you’re documenting. If you have any kind of relationship with a marketing team, they’re likely to push your writing in the complete opposite direction. If you don’t, it is possible to slowly slide into a negative viewpoint. What do I mean? I mean that your writing should be from the perspective of what the reader can do instead of what they can’t do, for example:

“*You can’t use the account page to reset your password. Contact* *support instead.*”

Instead, try something more positive, such as the following:

“*To reset your password, contact support. Use the account page to update your email address* *and username.*”

## Biased language

We are full of biases built upon a lifetime of societal, cultural, and personal experiences. Most of them probably won’t find their way into documentation, but some will, and ideally, you should remove as many as possible that do. This book isn’t the place for a lengthy discussion on why you should do this, but in short, it removes as much potential for offense as possible. Removing biased language has little actual effect on the effectiveness of your documentation, so why not do it anyway?

## Gender

Unlike many other common languages, English is mostly a non-gendered language in that inanimate objects don’t need a gender. A table is a table. It isn’t male, female, neutral, or any other gendered identity. While this makes it easier to remove gender from English text, it can still sneak in. First, some non-native speakers sometimes assign a gender to inanimate objects, for example:

“*The API, he responds* *with x*”

In English, that gender isn’t necessary.

A far more common unnecessary use of gender is when referring to animate objects – that is, people.

First, when referring to individuals, there has traditionally been a difference of opinion between US and non-US English on this topic.

Typically, in non-US English, you can use “they/them” almost anywhere to avoid using gender when referring to an animate actor. Traditionally, this was grammatically incorrect as it’s supposed to refer to a group of people, but being the flexible language it is, English has grown to accept this as correct.

US English tends to pick a gender from a length of text, use it, and then maybe switch to another, and so on, generally attempting to balance gender usage. However, I see this approach used less in writing overall and almost never in documentation. So, for this chapter’s purposes, I can confidently say use “they/them” if you need to refer to an animate actor, singular or plural.

Your options become more nuanced when referring to a collective of people, especially when using terminology, we have grown used to using to refer to a job or role in general. It’s uncommon for you to use these that much in documentation, but still, it’s worth drawing attention to anyway.

Here’s an example:

“*The service operates like a middleman, passing status messages to* *other services.*”

You should replace “middleman” with something without a gender, for example, “intermediary.”

Probably the most common offender – again, not used much in documentation – is “guys.” The argument over whether this term has transcended gender to mean something else is ongoing, but it’s one of my daily irritants, and I’m writing this chapter, so there it is. There are plenty of far better alternatives, such as “everyone,” “folks,” or “all.”

## Out-of-date language

Far more common is the use of out-of-date, possibly even considered offensive language. What constitutes this is an evolving discussion. But here are some examples.

To show some examples, I need to use words that some might find offensive. It’s also worth noting that changing some of the terminology might be out of your direct control if that’s a term the product uses. But if so, take a copy of this book and show it to someone who can.

For example, instead of “*Disable the configuration option*,” it’s better to use *toggle*, *turn off,* *change*, and so on, depending on the use case.

Another classic computing term that still sparks much discussion around its usage is *master* and *slave* in relation to distributed systems. I don’t want to get too deep into discussions over this problematic pair of terms but suffice it to say, they have a loaded history and plenty of alternatives.

You can try “follower” and “leader,” which still has some issues but is better. “Primary” and “replica” is a much better alternative. It’s also worth thinking if you need these terms at all. Without digging into the technical details of distributed systems, an increasing number of distributed systems use more fluid hierarchical approaches.

Another problematic word pairing is “*black list*” and “*white list*,” and the arguments for and against are similar to the aforementioned terms. However, in this case, the alternatives are more decided upon, with “deny list” and “allow list.”

That’s an example of three words or phrases with better, more contemporary alternatives, but there are far more.

Here are some links and further resources on the topic and examples of other terms to add more context to the discussion:

- [https://www.zdnet.com/article/linux-team-approves-new-terminology-bans-terms-like-blacklist-and-slave/](https://www.zdnet.com/article/linux-team-approves-new-terminology-bans-terms-like-blacklist-and-slave/)
- [https://www.zdnet.com/article/github-to-replace-master-with-alternative-term-to-avoid-slavery-references/](https://www.zdnet.com/article/github-to-replace-master-with-alternative-term-to-avoid-slavery-references/)
- [https://inclusivenaming.org/word-lists/](https://inclusivenaming.org/word-lists/)

# Summary

Grammar is a subject you could study your entire life and still be learning. This chapter gave you some building blocks for the most important aspects you need to know for technical writing. Remember the fundamental things you are trying to improve for your readers with good grammar choices:

- Remove as much of their cognitive load as possible when trying to understand complex or new topics
- Give the reader confidence that what they are reading is the best practice around a product and that the product can help them accomplish their goals
- Make it as clear as possible to readers how to accomplish a task they want to understand
- Make language as inclusive and unbiased as possible to broaden your audience and make them feel welcome

The next chapter looks at taking these grammatical building blocks and assembling them into a well-constructed page. Well-written words remain unread if they are presented poorly, hard to read, and hard to find.
