# 5

# The Technical Writing Process

In the previous two chapters, you learned how to structure documentation pages and grammar and style fundamentals for effective communication. With this knowledge, you’re now ready to tackle this chapter, which covers the process of working with others to figure out what to document and how effective it is.

The process of creating technical documentation isn’t too dissimilar to the process of creating the code that documentation explains. Creating technical documentation is never “done” or “finished” and is a constant iterative learning and improvement process.

The stages of the process, as I see them, are also fairly similar to software engineering. This chapter covers the following main topics:

- Scoping and requirements gathering
- Research and product testing
- Drafting and re-drafting
- Feedback, testing, and maintenance

These steps apply when creating new content or content for new features but can also apply when fixing issues or tweaking existing content, just minus some steps, or much shorter steps.

# Scoping and requirements gathering

Within a company or project, documentation requests can come from a variety of internal and external sources, including the following:

- A new feature that’s in progress, probably from a product owner
- A new feature that’s already been completed that needs documentation
- A feature gap that’s been identified by you or others
- A content gap that’s been identified by you or others
- A problem that’s been logged by you or others

When you start filling that content need, the first step is to figure out the current definition of done. I say “current” as just because there may be a completion point for the content needed now doesn’t mean it will remain that way forever. Likely, it will not be considered done in the future. However, while there are predictable potential future changes, there are also others that aren't, and finishing the work as completely as possible now can save work in the future.

“Done” is a complicated concept and one that different people have different opinions of and on, which is why it’s important to define it as clearly as possible from different perspectives. It’s worth noting that, try as hard as you might, you may still find that what you thought everyone meant by “done” is not how things turn out when you think you’re “done.” Depending on the people you work with and the type of company or project you work on, how you must mitigate this happening can vary, but I provide some tips and advice based on my experience.

Ask stakeholders what their expectations for the content is. These questions vary:

- An engineer might want you to cover important technical aspects they feel are essential for a user to know.
- A product owner might want you to cover how a new feature helps users save time with their daily work.
- Someone in a marketing team might want you to cover how the feature compares to competitors’ feature sets. Any other content creators might want you to write about the feature in a particular way.

You need to dig deeper than these one-line summaries of each stakeholder’s potential requirements, probably asking the same question in different ways or asking clarifying questions. Someone in one of those roles might supply you with other content that gives you some of the details you need or that you can base follow-up questions on.

While it can sometimes take several rounds of questions to dig into these expectations, people are usually clearer about them than their assumptions. What are their assumptions? Well, that’s hard to say. Often they won’t say them at all:

- An engineer might assume that anyone reading the content knows a key technical detail when they don’t, perhaps because they were too deep into the code of the feature and didn’t see the bigger picture or assumed that all other engineers “must know this”
- A product owner might assume a certain flow for the content because they have been focused on an ideal user flow for someone using the feature
- Someone in marketing might assume that you will describe the feature in overly positive and sales-heavy language and not in terms of practical usage

Another content creator might assume that you will write in a particular style or layout that you haven’t been made aware of.

Directly asking, “What are your assumptions about their content?” might not unearth them, but learning about the kinds of assumptions that each stakeholder might make can help you ask questions about those assumptions.

# What to document

If you are starting an entire set of documentation or a major feature from scratch, you might be wondering what to work on first and how much documentation you need.

At the risk of repeating myself, documentation is an iterative process, especially if you are a small team or undertaking documentation as part of another role. It’s almost impossible for you to document everything that a product might need at once. Unless you work in a sector where completeness and full accuracy are essential at launch, such as medical, sensitive industrial, and so on, then it’s unlikely you need everything documented at once.

So, where do you start? And how do you proceed after you start? If you have some existing metrics or roadmap that informs you of an order to document a product, then follow it, but in reality, it’s unlikely you will have any existing guidance, and it’s mostly “up to you.”

My general advice is to start at the beginning, then the end, and slowly fill in the gaps in the middle over time based on feedback.

This means creating a getting started guide or two and then ensuring that reference documentation is available to cover resources such as API or SDK functions. With these in place, you can release “minimum viable documentation.” The getting started guides will be enough for those who are interested in experimenting with a product to see if it suits their needs, and the reference documentation will be enough for those who know what they want to accomplish and need more details on the individual components to use.

With that content in place, you can use product roadmaps, further drafting phases, and the metrics you gather over time to fill in the gaps, slowly reaching toward “more complete documentation.”

# Research and product testing

If you are documenting something technical, then there is no replacement for getting your hands dirty experimenting with and using a product like an end user might do. This process is easier if you have a technical background or experience, but you can gain that over time, and sometimes, having a fresh pair of eyes can help reveal problems no one had anticipated. In small companies, at least, documentarians are often the first people to try a product or feature after developers, and our position between engineering, product, marketing, and support can give us a unique and broad perspective on a product.

However, I am what I call a “technical” tech writer. I studied computer science. I dabble in programming. I can throw together infrastructure as code and databases quite happily. Don’t ask me to create a large-scale production-ready application, but I know enough to write examples and, crucially, ask the right questions.

Few documentarians specialize in documenting one product, project, or ecosystem in their entire career. As hard as you might try (and we tend to have curious minds), you can’t learn and understand everything about any product, project, or ecosystem, and not more than one of these. But again, to reiterate, what documentarians do have is a broad overview of many things, sometimes more than anyone else. It’s the nature of creating documentation. You need to know how components fit together to form a flow, even if you’re a writer on a team.

This means that documentarians need to learn how to learn, what questions to ask, where to probe, and how to figure out the important bits and pieces that are essential to explaining a concept. This process leads from asking team members and collaborators questions to asking questions about the product itself. You can then take this knowledge and hands-on experience and ask team members better and more informed questions during review processes.

You can achieve this experience and exposure by watching demos and speaking with the team members who built it, but nothing replaces trying it yourself.

This book is primarily aimed at engineers who want to increase their documentation skills, but there will likely be people from other backgrounds and even experienced engineers reading. Well, sometimes, they assume knowledge of their own and others.

While this varies from product to product, my process for learning to learn a product is roughly as follows.

The first step – almost step zero – is to assume nothing about the end user. This sounds obvious, but we all bring many biases and assumptions from our knowledge and experiences that vary wildly, from operating system choice to educational background, all of which can affect how we might explain something to someone. Over time, you build an internal list to check. Here are some ideas:

- The operating system used, including its version and architecture, as well as any security restrictions in place from an IT team.
- Common dependencies such as version control systems and language runtime versions.

A quick aside about surprising dependencies

I have lost hours trying to install JavaScript dependencies that relied on a Python or C dependency, with no mention of this anywhere in the documentation. You need to check *all* dependencies!

- Programming language norms and patterns that are common to the language the application is written in but not necessarily for end users
- Your common process for setting up a project or environment

If the project involves the user undertaking some kind of environment setup to run a programming language or database, for example, then some tools can help you start from a clean setup each time. Without getting into too much detail, look into container runtime technologies such as Docker or Podman. These tools let you define a set of configurations around an application and start it isolated from the rest of your machine, meaning you won’t detrimentally affect the rest of your local machine. When you’re done, you can delete the instance of that application and recreate and delete it as you need. Other options to consider are programming language version managers, which let you switch between different versions as relevant for projects. One final option is using a virtual machine, a completely separate “computer” and operating system running on your computer. This can be useful if you want to test software on Windows when you’re using macOS, for example.

If you’re testing software that runs in isolation, such as in a web browser or desktop application, then find out if there’s a way to reset it to its defaults so that you can repeatedly test as a new user would.

There are also ways to have a development or operations team set up reproducible environments for you, meaning you can have a setup that regularly refreshes itself.

With the underpinnings in place for testing and learning, how do you learn? Like learning in general, often, it’s easier when you have a practical project to try and learn from. Often, creating such a project is also useful, and it also helps to have code in the documentation and downloadable demo projects. If you don’t have a personal project in mind or one that suits the project, ask teams in the company that might, such as customer support, customer success, sales engineers, or developer relations.

Take that application, start it, break it, experiment with it, and try to integrate it with other services and tools. Use it like an end user would. If you can access the code, dig into it and look around to see how it fits together.

You won’t understand everything, and you don’t need to. This experimentation just helps you ask better and more informed questions.

# Drafting and re-drafting

Now, it’s time to start writing. Much like any other form of writing, one draft is rarely enough. Once you have a first draft, you need to get all involved stakeholders to take a look and give their input. This process can take some time, but it is important to ensure the correct balance of technical accuracy, company priorities, and language clarity.

This chapter won’t focus on tools for doing this, but the process. There are several well-established toolchains for reviewing technical copy that influence the advice I give, but I try to remain as agnostic as possible.

Getting rounds of feedback on documentation can directly correlate to your ability to extract the expectations and assumptions mentioned earlier. If these were not clear in the earlier stages, then this likely becomes evident during feedback. Sometimes, this is because you misunderstood or incorrectly assumed something communicated with you, or more often than not because people are often not sure of themselves until they see something in front of them.

I have found that feedback on documentation comes at two extremes: next to no feedback to the point that you’re unsure what anyone thought, or so much feedback you don’t know where to start. You must deal with both cases in different ways.

If you don’t receive enough, you may need to set up specific sessions to get feedback from stakeholders. When faced with walls of text or a list of changes, people aren’t sure how they feel about it, so you need to ask specific questions. With a lot of user testing, you generally don’t want to lead the user, but content is different as you risk getting lots of feedback about details you may not need feedback on at this point or complaints about the product or feature.

Here are some potential questions to ask:

- What did you think about what you read?
- If you could change anything about what you read, what would it be?
- What was easy or difficult to understand and why?
- How would you explain this content to someone else?
- Does this address your needs? If not, why not?

If you have clear competitors with similar feature documentation, ask similar questions about that content.

As you ask these questions and receive answers, people are also likely to give feedback that, while it’s useful, you didn’t need at this point – things such as word choice and grammar and spelling issues. Some of these may be genuine mistakes, while others have reasons for being the way they are. But for the most part, these are a distraction in the early stages of review. You want subject matter experts to give you feedback on their area of expertise, not a misplaced comma. Of course, when you get feedback from other writers, then worry about these misplaced commas, but as I say, you want each subject expert to give feedback on their area of expertise as much as possible.

Too much feedback doesn’t necessarily mean you did a bad job. Some reviewers are opinionated or have lots of thoughts they want to share. The harder part of too much feedback is going through it and figuring out what to do with it.

Some of it will be useful and similar to what I mentioned previously, but it might not focus on what you need feedback on from that person. Make a note of it for a later day and politely thank the reviewer for their comment. Some of it might just be thoughts they wanted to share on the product, feature, or documentation they feel is needed regarding a related concept. Again, make a note of it for a later day and thank the reviewer for their feedback. What’s left will be varying levels of usefulness, and likely, much of it will be contradictory feedback. Your job is to sift through all that feedback and determine what you want to act on and when. As a documentarian, you may not be the expert on the product’s inner workings, but you are an expert on figuring out how to explain them. It’s OK to push back on feedback, but do it in a friendly, professional manner and explain why you choose not to accept it.

Sometimes, that’s enough for a reviewer to accept your counter-feedback, but sometimes, it’s not. It’s all too easy for rounds of feedback to get heated, especially when it’s asynchronous and in writing. I am sure we have all found ourselves in situations where conversations and discussions turned stressful, aggressive, petty, or toxic. Without diving too deep into the topic, as it’s a big discussion in itself, you can apply much of the advice from [*Chapter 1*](B20936_01.xhtml#_idTextAnchor024) to make all written communication as nuance-free and inclusive as possible. It’s time-consuming to write the first thing that comes into your head without thinking about it, but you will save stress, misunderstanding, and probably time if you do. Of course, this doesn’t mean that everyone in a conversation does the same. I have often found that if you try to be as pragmatic, patient, and open-minded as possible when dealing with online communication, you can generally keep a conversation as cordial and productive as possible.

So, when is a feedback round complete so that you can publish changes to the documentation?

This can depend on your work sector and the risk of incorrect documentation. For high-risk sectors such as medical, financial, or industrial, you probably need to have documentation changes fully reviewed and signed off before it’s published as mistakes can potentially cost lives or have a large financial impact. In these sectors, software release cycles are also often slower and more considered for the same reason, so documentation releases might be similar.

For most other sectors, there’s more leeway. As mentioned several times in this book, much like the software it explains, documentation is never done. It’s a constant iterative process of improvement. This means there is a time – often thanks to external pressures such as release dates and marketing campaigns – when you need to close feedback and publish. People tend to get attached to what they worked on and will never be entirely satisfied with the content you’ve created, but at the same time, if you asked them what perfection would look like, they also don’t have an answer. This is all perfectly normal and something you just get used to during feedback. Then, typically, in the hours and days after publishing, you get more feedback that somehow no one had before, and the feedback cycle starts all over again.

# Feedback, testing, and maintenance

The previous section covered internal feedback before publishing content. This section covers feedback and usage from your intended users and how to manage that. Getting and processing feedback and metrics on documentation is notoriously difficult. I cover some things I have tried and worked with and things that I know others have tried. However, none of these options are perfect, and the documentarian community is still looking for the “best” way to handle this. There are a handful of ways you are likely to receive feedback on documentation:

- If your documentation is open source, readers and users may create issues about problems they find on the repository for the source of the documentation.
- If the code for the application is open source, users may create issues about problems they have understanding the documentation for the project in the source repository.
- If you add some form of feedback widget (a comments box, a “was this helpful?” option, rate these docs, and so on), then readers and users may leave feedback they have. [*Chapter 6*](B20936_06.xhtml#_idTextAnchor105) covers some options for this.
- If your product has commercial support via support requests, users may give feedback on the problems and difficulties they find with implementing or using the product. If your product or project has a community forum, then people may post about their problems or experiences there.

While harder to find and generally only suitable for products and projects with a larger user base, you can often find feedback and experiences from the wider community via community-created blog posts, talks, other forums, and so on.

The challenge with almost all of these options is that the feedback you receive may not be relevant to the documentation.

You will probably receive a lot of spam for some of the more public-facing options mentioned previously, such as feedback widgets or repository issues. This includes junk messages and time wasters, especially for larger open source projects, which are full of people trying to increase their online profiles and portfolios by registering tiny change requests or irrelevant comments that don’t serve any purpose.

This aside, documentation is often the largest direct interaction point people have with a product, so much like internal feedback, they are likely to use it more as a place to log issues they have with the product. However, this doesn’t make it a waste of your time or irrelevant to documentarians. First, feedback on the product is still useful to someone, and you can pass it on to relevant people. Second, it can still highlight areas where documentation needs improvement. If people are frustrated with a particular feature for not working the way they expected or wanted, you may not be able to fix the feature directly or immediately. Still, you can find ways for the documentation to better explain or factor in these frustrations.

Once you have whittled public feedback down to the useful remains, figuring out what to do with it differs from internal feedback for several reasons:

- While valid, one person’s feedback from a silent majority of thousands of users may not be worth addressing. If, however, multiple users give the same or closely related feedback, it’s worth addressing.
- Opinions and feedback aren’t always the same thing. Again, you need to assess the number of people who have given the same or closely related feedback, but remember that someone thinking something is wrong doesn’t mean it is.
- Internal roadmaps, priorities, and agendas can trump external feedback and requests. This doesn’t mean that you ignore the external input, but it does mean you need to communicate this fact with the feedback giver.

You should prioritize addressing externally contributed genuine errors and mistakes over feedback but still factor in these points when you do so.

But with all these competing feedback items and priorities, how do you decide which to tackle, in what order, and if any changes help? Metrics and measuring the success of documentation is another complex area.

## Metrics and measuring success

An obvious place to start is with metrics such as page views, bounce rates, and time spent on pages, but these only tell you some of the story. Is someone spending 30 seconds on a page of documentation good or bad? Maybe they found the answer they were looking for and moved on quickly. Maybe they found nothing and moved on quickly. It’s hard to say.

Similarly, what does a lot of page views mean? You might expect that on a getting started guide, but what if there’s a traffic spike on an obscure API reference page? What does that show to you? You can build up maps of pathways and assumptions based on traffic sources, search terms, and the pages a user follows, but they won’t tell you everything and pure page views aren’t that relevant in knowing if documentation was useful.

A more useful measurement option for documentation is tracking how people read pages, and a handful of tools are available. As with many tracking tools, content blockers could render them useless, and if your audience is developers, they tend to be a demographic that uses blockers more than others. But if they do work, they are useful for showing you roughly how a reader scrolls around the page, where their mouse rests, the page elements they highlight, and more. They may not reveal what a reader thinks of your content, but they reveal patterns of usage and provide more insights into the metrics mentioned previously.

A better and more popular metric to track is something along the lines of “time to get started.” This tracks how long it takes for a reader to complete a getting started guide. How you set up this tracking depends on your product and its technical stack, but adding interactivity to documentation in different ways is another big topic in itself and one covered later in this book. You can then integrate similar ideas across more documentation pages, helping you track how many people read pages and what they do with the knowledge they acquire there.

Another good metric to try and track is how changes in documentation affect interactions with support. Drawing direct correlations is difficult, and measuring this is a mix of quantitative and qualitative metrics, but over time, you can probably start to see when the quantities of questions relating to certain topics change.

These inputs help you decide what content you need to update and prioritize the order to undertake that maintenance. If you have popular pages that need fixes or updates, then handle those first over pages that see little traffic. Among those popular pages, prioritize the more critical bugs in the content over small linguistic tweaks.

It’s good practice to maintain the most popular pages regularly, even if no one has mentioned any actual issues. How regularly you do this depends on the available resources, but you can use some of the metrics sources mentioned previously to determine which pages to cast a fresh pair of eyes over.

When you have that list, you need to decide on the kinds of aspects of the content you should maintain. Here are some ideas:

- Any changes to the company or project style guide since the page was last updated (more on this topic later)
- Software and dependency version updates mentioned in the content
- Follow any technical flows to see if they still work as intended
- Render errors in the live version of a page
- Screenshot updates for any output changes from the application or project

You can keep a checklist or template of each item to check as you work through pages.

# Summary

In this chapter, you learned how to kickstart the documentation process and work with others to figure out what documentation means to all stakeholders involved.

The chapter covered the typical process to follow when creating or updating content and what’s involved at each stage. Many of the details vary, depending on your internal structure and processes and the nature of the product or project. However, this chapter presented common advice that almost anyone can follow.

If there’s one takeaway from this chapter, it’s that documentation is almost always in flux and progress. Hopefully, this chapter gave you the skills to keep up with the ongoing process and keep documentation up to date and as useful as possible to readers.

So far, the book has mostly covered principles and theory, which are essential to know as you learn any process in detail. However, as technically minded people, we all know that, while not as important as we might like to think, tools are also an important part of any process to understand. The next chapter looks at some of the fundamental tools you need and how to select which to use from the myriad options available.
